hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for
2024 beginning in early February and
running through June Tammy and I an
assortment of special guests are going
to visit 51 cities in the US you can
find out more information about this on
my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye all of a sudden I start breaking
down crying and I didn't even realize
what was in me myself and I'm not
wanting my wife to see me in this point
of weakness because I feel maybe I would
be judged and I've had a lot of men as
I've spoken about this tell me I
couldn't tell my wife that she would
judge me too much she would leave me if
I broke down crying in front of her like
that she didn't she pulled me in closer
and she was like told me every single
time she like I know this is difficult I
know there's a lot of pressure on you
right now you can quit if you want I
will love you regardless but I believe
in you to get through this and you will
get through this if you choose
[Music]
to hello everyone today I'm speaking
with five time consec Ive Mr Olympia
Champion Chris Bumstead and so what do
we talk about well we talk about the
utility of aiming at something high and
pursuing it um the opportunity cost that
comes along with that the challenge of
balancing that kind of single-minded and
maybe necessary obsession with
developing everything else that makes
for a full life we talk a lot about
marriage and about how he's integrated
his relationship into his into his
highlevel professional Pursuits Chris's
wife is having a baby very soon we
talked a fair bit about Parenthood
talked about the role that his father
played in his life U we talked about his
the pleasure he takes in and has
discovered in being a role model in
sharing his disciplined Journey towards
a pinnacle with his followers we talked
about his practice of identifying the
things that are impediments to his
progress forward his fears his
insecurities his insufficiency genes his
determination to face those things
voluntarily his ability to overcome
those impediments as a consequence that
was particularly relevant on the public
speaking and social engagement front the
way that him and his wife have
negotiated that within the confines of
the relationship and um his his plans
for the future that continues after his
Stellar athletic and public career comes
to its particular close so join us for
that so you made your debut on the
professional stage at in 2017 how old
how old were you then in 2017 I was 22
years old 22 okay so like I'm very
ignorant about the domain of activity
that you are engaged in so I'm going to
ask all sorts of stupid questions and to
to catch myself up so what did it mean
to what does it mean to debut
professionally in the in the in the
world of bodybuilding and and maybe you
could also tell us about that world in
general I don't understand its structure
or or you know the the hierarchies of
competition how you move up and all of
that like what sort of world is that
yeah so it's there's an mainly just an
amateur in a professional league and it
changed a lot over the years where it
used to be a much bigger deal if you
turn pro and you call it getting your
pro card in bodybuilding so you compete
as an amateur usually in your city and
then in your state and then you'll do a
national level level show and that's all
an amateure and typically when you win a
National level show you'll get your pro
card and then when you're a pro that
puts you into a brand new division where
you're starting back from ground zero
and you're competing against usually
older people who have been in there a
lot longer competing in the Pro for
years and there's multiple Pro shows
around the country and around the world
all year and each one of those shows
qualifies you to compete at the Olympia
and the Olympia is like the Super Bowl
just like the Olympia the end all be all
of bodybuilding so that's the goal that
everybody is chasing at the end of the
day
okay so the so Olympia is the Olympia is
the P the Pinnacle and you won five
consecutive championships and is that
the right terminology even did you is it
a championship that you win what what's
what what's a yeah okay okay and that
was the you want but but yeah so I had
won five olympias over the last five
years exactly yeah right and are you the
and are you the current holder of the
title that's correct yeah the five pre
okay good good good good just one of and
has has anybody else managed that for 5
years in a row no so it's actually a
pretty new division I'm in so that's
another different tier that's within
bodybuilding there's open bodybuilding
which is there's no weight limit and
those are like the people like Ronnie
Coleman and the huge people that a lot
of people know the big names of and
there's no weight limit there and I'm in
a division called classic physique which
is meant to bring back more of like the
Arnold days a little bit more aesthetic
and not quite as big so I have a weight
cap that I have to match so my
division's only been around since 2016
so there were two previous winners
before me over the three years but the
division's only been around for eight
years and I've won five of those eight
years so no one's really had a chance to
beat that okay okay so I was noticing
yeah with regard to weight I was
noticing I don't know how accurate
Wikipedia is but it listed your weight
um as 234 but in the off season as
264 that's pretty accurate yeah oh okay
so what's what's the reason for the
discrepancy there so in bodybuilding
it's all about like bulking and cutting
mainly you spend a majority of your year
trying to put on muscle and to do so you
need to put on a little bit more body
fat eat more food train a little bit
more intense do less cardio so your
body's growing and then when you enter
prep which is like the big thing of
bodybuilding you enter like a 12 to 16
week prep which is very strict dieting
and it's whole intention of that is
stripping as much fat as possible while
maintaining as much muscle as possible
and so that's where the weight
fluctuates so you want to get to a
healthy body fat but a higher weight to
put on some muscle and then you chop
that down and that's where the weight
discrepancy comes in so I'll be 265 is
at my highest and I'll come down to
about 240 when I'm right on stage okay
and that's and that's to to to make the
most of your to make the most of your
shape for the competition I presume to
make you to make you as cut as you can
be for the purposes of the display is
that is that the case exactly yeah it's
like chiseling down a stone down to the
all the excess Stone bring it down to
just the art of it right right right and
so when you're in that 12 to 16 week
period what what do you do on the diet
front what do you have to do in order to
lose that 30 pounds and what what does
your diet regimen consist of um it
typically consists of you start building
up to a maximum amount of calories that
you can throughout the year so your
metabolism is flying and then when you
start prep you just slowly start
bringing down the calories while
increasing the amount of cardio you do
so let's say in my offseason when I'm at
my heaviest I'm eating about 5,500 5,000
calories and at my lowest at the end of
my prep I'll be eating about 1,500
calories so it comes down quite a bit
and within that you're adding in cardio
so you're expending a little bit more
calories doing that and it's just kind
of changing the energy output versus
input to make sure that you're inputting
less than you're outputting I see so
it's basically it's not so much if I if
I have this correct it's not so much
what you're eating at that point point
it's how it's How much you're eating
essentially assessed by by caloric
intake I mean I'm curious about this
because as you perhaps know know I have
a almost entirely carnivorous diet and
have for a long time and I've been
watching sha Baker a lot on on
especially on his Twitter feed Doctor
Who's been promoting the carnivore diet
and um it seems to be unbelievably
useful for adding muscle mass but also
decreasing body fat content so I was
curious ious about you know the the
ratio of carbohydrates to proteins or if
if there's anything additional that
you're doing apart from adjusting
caloric intake per se yeah yeah so
typically there's like a set amount of
protein people will eat and it stays
around then so I'll eat about 300 gram
of protein in a day and as my calories
come down I'm normally pulling away my
carbs and my fats and keeping my protein
the same so calories are coming down but
protein staying the same so that ratio
just changes and that's why bodybuilding
is uh so much different than a lot of
other sports if you can call it that
because it's not just about how you
perform but it's about how you look so
typically in sports it's like what's
going to allow me to perform the best
whereas in bodybuilding it's like no
I've just got to look the best and then
I still have to go and perform in the
gym as best as I can so it's kind of
balancing those two to allow yourself to
be in the gym getting the best workouts
and you can but you also can't be eating
too much to perform at your best because
then you'll be holding on too much body
fat so it's kind of an art of balancing
all that right right okay so so let's go
through the progression of your career
from amateur to professional and then I
would like also to talk about the
criteria by which you're by which you're
judged exactly what it is that the
judges are looking for we can talk a
little bit about the popularity of the
the sport as well so you said when you
were an amateur there are local comp so
what exactly are the structures of the
competitions and how popular is this so
you started I I believe you started
weightlifting when you were about 14 is
that is that correct yeah it was right
around then yeah okay and and and why
did you start when you were 14 and what
was the consequence of
starting um I just started I started in
the gym because I played a lot of sports
and I was very athletic but I wasn't
really good at the skill of the sports
so I played hockey basketball football
but I wasn't great at dribbling or
shooting but I was really fast and
strong so I ended up kind of sticking to
what I like you know I knew I was good
at strengths I was good in the gym so I
started doing that more and more and I
just had a passion for that I slowly
built that and as I started to as Sports
get progressively more competitive I
started to kind of get pushed out of
that but I noticed I had a lot of a lot
of unique skills in the gym if you will
so I started to excel very well in that
above a lot of people and of course at a
young age when you're starting to get
attention from girls and see some excess
and put on some muscle and all that you
start to enjoy that a little bit more
makes you like but the training in the
gym even more so I put more and more
focus into that started nailing my diet
my nutrition training everything like
that and then it was when I was in grade
12 my sister started dating a local
bodybuilder and they're actually married
now he's my brother in-law and he
started coaching me into the the true
realm of bodybuilding because before
that I was just training to be strong I
didn't understand bodybuilding to how
precise it really was so he started
teaching me the intri intricacies of
that and he saw the potential in me he's
like you're young I've 18 years old had
a lot of muscle on me he's like you
should try doing a bodybuilding show
I'll coach you we'll see how it goes
have some fun with it why not oh yeah so
I was like sure you know I'll give it a
shot okay okay so let's let's walk into
the practicalities of that because there
there will be lots of people who are
watching and listening who in principle
would like to discipline themselves in
principle they'd like to hit the gym and
you know undergo some physical
transformation to make themselves
stronger and healthier and more
attractive and like I started
weightlifting when I was about let's see
21 22 something like that I was very
very very thin and not very strong and I
I packed on about 35 lbs of muscle in
about 2 years I had to eat like a mad
dog to do that and um there's a reason
I'm telling you this I mean one of
because it did a lot of things for me
that I didn't understand that
weightlifting would do now I used free
weights and one of the things I noticed
apart from the fact that I packed on
muscle and was Stronger was that my
posture improved a lot I was starting to
get hunched a little bit because I was
typ sitting and writing a lot and it
pulled my shoulders back up straight and
then it was really good for my
coordination especially my lower body my
legs got a lot more coordinated and uh
the other thing it did was produce and I
think this went along with the
coordination and maybe that was from
working all the little tendons and so
forth that you do with free weights it
also made me a lot more physically like
confident and I think I don't think that
was nearly as much a consequence of the
strength as it was a consequence of the
increase
coordination okay so back when you were
14 you were already athletic you started
but you started hitting the gym more
thoroughly what what like what size were
you what height were you when you were
14 how were you built physically when
you were when you were you know that
young uh teenager I don't remember my
exact size but I was like a lean skinny
kidish I was probably like just under
six foot maybe 180 lb 170 lb or so so I
was never really small and even when I
graduated I was about 220 lb so
definitely notice some of the same
things as yourself I was definitely a
bit of an anxious kid quiet and
introvert and going in the gym by myself
playing some music just enjoying that
allowed me to like control the outcome
of all that and it was really fun for me
and obviously like you said you noticed
as well it builds confidence in you even
just being good at something can build
confidence in you so obviously that was
that was part of what I started to do
and like I said you get a little
attention from having some muscle at a
young age and that builds a little bit
more confidence and all these things
started kind of trickling in my mind
being like oh wow I really like this I
should keep doing if I do more of it
I'll get more of these good feelings
from it right okay so so you are a
pretty big kid you you're already 6 feet
tall you're you're and you're pretty
built it mean 180 and 6 feet at 14 you
so you have okay so you had the natural
physique for this and then how how did
you start like had you been a
disciplined kid up to then how had you
done in school like were were you
someone who had regular and good habits
were you a conscientious person to begin
with you know I'm kind of wondering how
you managed to develop the discipline to
start working out in the gym and how
regularly were
you walk me through how you learn to do
this and and step by step so that people
listening could figure out for
themselves what they would do if they
decided to go to the gym and also the
obstacles you know when I went to the
gym I went at Migel and like I said I
was very thin I was about 6 feet tall
but about 135 lbs
like very very thin and not very strong
and one of the obstacles to me of being
in the gym was
that it's it's it's embarrassing even to
some degree to recount because when I
was there people would come over and
show me how to use the weights and you
know that that's friendly but it's also
very annoying and I think I was bench
pressing like 75 pounds with some
difficulty at that point and so you know
that's not very much weight and so one
of the things you can imagine that when
people are going to hit the gym there's
there's a couple of especially if they
haven't been athletic there's a couple
of things that are going to be
impediments they're going to be
self-conscious they don't know what the
hell they're doing plus hypothetically
they they lack discipline now you had
the advantages of being slightly you
know somewhat on the larger side and
also being athletic but how did you
develop the discipline and what
impediments did you have to overcome as
you were developing that discipline yeah
so I mean I heard a quote the other day
that stuck with me because I thought of
this it was you don't start something
because you're passionate you stick with
it because you're passionate so I kind
of just started it I fell into it
naturally and like I said as I started
to see results and get a little bit more
joy out of it I started to become more
passionate and put more effort into it
and every year since I was a child I've
become a little bit more consistent a
little bit more passionate and put a
little bit more effort into it so my
discipline has continued to grow over
time because I just stuck with something
for a while and want to see how it went
and it just kind of tumble affected but
I definitely had some of the similar
feelings and I hear from everybody about
being a little anxious being in the gym
and it's funny it's people will come
help you to make you feel comfortable
but like you said it could almost be
demeaning make you feel a little bit
like all right you think I need your
help but when I was young right great
yeah so my dad actually had one of those
old sand weights it was like a weer bar
with sand weights in the basement and I
remember setting up some boxes filling
them up with stuff and lying on it and
trying to bench press on it because it's
hard to balance a bench press at first
like you talked about the stability and
all that it's difficult so I was a young
kid in my basement doing that with
push-ups and pull-ups and that's really
what got me into the whole weightlifting
building muscle thing and that was
purely like I mentioned just to get
better at sports I assumed if I was
Stronger I would be better at Sports and
then after that I joined a gym at a
young age there was a summer program
that gave kids a free membership over
the summer and I had to ask my parents
to come sign me up because you had to be
16 and I was 14 so they had to come in
and sign a waiver for that and it's I
wasn't the most disciplined kid for sure
my parents definitely made me
independent and to to have some of the
free reign that they gave me to be able
to go out with friends and do stuff I
had to earn it I had to have a job
finish my chores do my homework and all
that stuff so my parents definitely
raised me to have that kind of mindset
and I grew up in a town with some good
kids luckily didn't get stuck into
anything bad and we were all very all my
friends were very passionate about
sports and I wanted to excel so I kept
putting myself in the gym and at a young
age I remember I didn't have a car or
anyway to get there all the time my
parents would work late and I remember I
would run even in the winter in Ottawa
it would be like a foot of snow on on
the ground and I'd be jogging to the gym
it was about a mile and a half but still
a decent little run in the snow and I
was just super dedicated from a young
age because I loved it so much and as I
mentioned sometimes just being in the
gym with my music and that Focus was
just like a point of solitude for myself
to enjoy and there was a quiet gym
luckily and I I slowly learned over time
that no one in the gym is looking at you
or judging you everybody who's everybody
who's been in there was a beginner at
some point so they're not looking at you
making fun of you they were you probably
a year or two go and everyone's just
truly there to help out and I've
discovered that the fitness community in
general is a very encouraging Community
because everybody has the same
experience as you they get in they feel
better they get some confidence they're
like this is great like I would love for
other people to feel this too you hope
if they're nice enough and that
typically allows them to be very
inclusive and want people to come and
join and just be a part of it all so I
found it's not a judgmental people think
when once you're in it right well that's
a really good that's a really good point
you know because part of being
self-conscious in the gym is and this is
true for overweight people and for
anybody who's out of shape or for
anybody who just doesn't know what
they're doing which is pretty much
everybody when they go to the gym the
first time especially if they don't have
a as we pointed out a history of
athleticism it's very easy to think that
these people who are throwing the
weights around in there are judgmental
you know it's really a consequence of
your own self-consciousness and and
proclivity to to self judge judement but
you know the fact that those people are
in there working on themselves does
indicate very clearly through their
actions that they believe that they
still have work to do and as you said
the probability that many of them who
are in there or perhaps all of them to
some degree were in the same boat as you
at some point is very very high you know
and it was certainly the case that the
people who were coming over to help me
weren't doing it in a judgmental way you
know that was my problem and there's
another thing to to concentrate on on
there too you know one of the things
that one of my favorite thinkers um his
psychoanalyst Carl Young pointed out was
very very helpful to me to understand
was that he said the precursor to the
Redeemer is the fool and what he meant
by that was that if you're going to
master
something the first thing you have to do
is admit to yourself that you're not a
master of it already because then you
wouldn't have to do anything so you have
to allow yourself to be the fool and you
know one of the things I've noticed
about people who are highly successful
is that they will jump into new things
that they don't know anything about and
be the fool be the person who doesn't
know anything be the person who's low
man on the totem pole start at the
lowest rung and they won't pretend to
know more than they do know they ask the
stupid questions that are necessary they
humble themselves in accordance with
their novice position they like they
accept that weight and but they also do
so in the understanding that if they're
honest with themselves they can make the
kind of incremental progress that you
described right because you said you got
more and more disciplined as the years
went by and that it doesn't matter it
doesn't matter if you start at the
bottom what matters is that you're so
stupid and blind that you refuse to
learn and that you stay there right so
it's it's trajectory that matters and
not absolute position and so that's a
useful thing for people to know it's
like of course you feel like a bloody
fool when you do something the first
time what the hell do you expect like
you are a fool but that doesn't mean
that you can't you can't move beyond
that yeah yeah no you touched on
something great there when you're
expanding if it's something that makes
you feel worried or anxious or you
thinking other people are judging you
it's probably actually reflection of
yourself something that you need to grow
on and that's something that I really
noticed cuz I used to be super anxious
in public speaking and I remember you've
done a lot of talks on fear immersion
and stepping into and the confidence
that can build and I didn't really
understand this whole mindset of all the
confidence that would come from that and
I but I would always do podcast or
public speaking or I started to get in
some of seminar events or being asked to
come talk from my success as a
bodybuilder and every time I went there
I'd be Mr Olympia walking into this
thing terrified out of my mind like hand
shaking stumbling my words and I still
feel like that sometimes but I've gotten
better but I realized I took a step back
after a few times I'm like all right
this is something I need to put myself
into more to become better at it and I
started to actually plan my events to be
more talking based sign up for a few
more request to talk a little bit more
in front of people and it was terrifying
at first and I still embarrass myself
sometimes I still have memory standing
on stage stuttering or my list comes out
really bad and feeling embarrassed and
getting off stage but I also have a lot
of memories now where I've killed the
good talk and I've stepped off stage
feeling so confident and over that Realm
Of Me becoming better at something I
wasn't good at I noticed my confidence
in all aspects of my life started to
increase not just in public speaking so
I think that being able to have that
humility like you said look at yourself
be the fool and understand where you
need to grow and put yourself into
positions to grow is something that has
helped me immensely and something I've
taken from some of your words in the
past
too if you like most Americans you're
struggling to make ends meet everything
is more expensive these days by the time
you pay your bills fill up your car and
go grocery shopping there's almost
nothing left you're using your credit
card more than you'd like and last I
check the average credit card interest
rate for Americans was
24% that's insane how are you supposed
to dig yourself out from all of that
debt if you own a home I want you to
call my friends at American financing
right now interest rates have finally
dropped into the fives which is the
lowest they've been in a long time so
call American financing to talk about
their refinance options they save their
customers an average of
$854 a month by tapping into their home
equity and wiping out High interest
credit and debt think about it
$854 a month is like a $110,000 raise
what a relief that could be for you and
your family don't wait to take control
of your finances these rates might not
last long so act today call American
financing at 888
84303 and if you call today you may not
have to make next month's mortgage
payment that's 888
84303 or visit americanfinancing.net
nmls 182 334 nmls consumer access.org
APR for rates in the five start at 6.46%
for well-qualified borrowers call 888
8433 for details about credit costs and
[Music]
terms yeah well let's delve into that a
little bit because we can imagine your
situation you know like you're a big guy
and you're Better Built than anyone else
in the world arguably and so what people
would assume looking at you it's the
halo effect like if you see someone
who's attractive and who's in very good
physical shape and who's strong you're
going to assume automatically that every
other good thing that's confident goes
along with that so that actually puts
you as a you know that puts you in a
kind of a double bind because not only
do you have to get up and speak publicly
but people are going to assume a
priority that well you've got this like
why the hell would someone like that be
worried about it and so and you are
worried about it as and and public
speaking is something that does terrify
people it's it's one of the most highly
cited it's fear of public exposure right
and fear of making a fool of yourself
and and being and being judged harshly
by a lot of people and following falling
in status because of it it's a major
league fear now but so so you had
reasons to be afraid now you said that
you had decided to voluntarily confront
that regardless and there's a real key
lesson there because one of the things
that's been extraordinarily well
documented among psychologists and and
uh well we'll stick with psychologists
who deal with anxiety is that the the
universal Pathway to overcoming Anxiety
is to voluntarily face what you're
afraid of in graduated doses it has to
be voluntary it can't be accidental you
have to you have and that's partly a
mindset issue and you know that mindset
goes very very deep it's not just
something that you think when you decide
that you're going to confront something
voluntarily you change
you probably change yourself all the way
down past the cellular
level you you change the way that genes
code for proteins you change the way
your cells operate you change the way
the neurons communicate like everything
about you changes and what you're
doing what you did let's say with public
speaking is not only did you develop the
skill set that was associated with
public speaking and we can go into that
a bit more but you
simultaneously develop the part of you
that is capable at the physical and the
psychological level of confronting
everything that's frightening as such
you know it's so cool because it means
that you can what what you do with
people in therapy when you do exposure
therapy which is essentially what you
did let's say when you decided to
arrange for yourself more and more
demanding speaking opportunities is that
you you don't become less afraid exactly
you become braver and braver and braver
and that's different right because
you're always going to be facing
challenges that are Beyond you to some
degree there's always a reason to be
terrified into paralysis but you can
learn to be a more courageous person and
that's not just an attitude like I said
it changes you at every single level of
your being all like really all the way
down to the molecular there's a lot of
work done on this now on in a field
called epigenetics there's even some
possibility like this is you know more
on the edge but but there is some
possibility some of the changes that you
can make
behaviorally can change you so
profoundly genetically that those
changes can be transmitted to your
children let's say so you know that's
really something that that's about as
profound a change as you could possibly
imagine so let's let's talk about your
experience with your experiences with
public speaking so you you mentioned
that there were tell me exactly if you
would what it is that you were afraid of
to begin with what what would go what
were the thoughts that would go through
your mind that were that were
intimidating I mean definitely as anyone
can imagine when you put yourself in
front of a bunch of people you're in a
position to be judged the very
vulnerable spot and I can't really
pinpoint exactly where it came from but
I have some minor memories from a child
in front of a class or something like
that being super embarrassed and
sweating but I do think a lot of it
comes from I have a speech impediment
I've had a lisp since I was young and
when I get nervous it gets worse and
when I was younger it was much worse so
I used to be teased for that a little
bit which made me I'm sure much more
quiet and introvert and just not wanting
to talk so not wanting to talk around
anyone obviously he's much scared to
talk around a large group of people so
now Standing On Top of people my mouth
will get really dry I'll start to be
like my tongue will stick out of my
mouth I'm like oh my God I'm going to
sound dumb people are going to laugh at
me and judge me and it led to this kind
of spiraling effect and you really hit
the nail on the head when you talked
about
the visual Persona I give off when
someone sees me or hears about my career
or something they already have an
expectation of who I am and that's
something that I've worked on a lot in
the past couple years of this
differentiation with my therapist who
helped me with this between what I would
call seum versus Christopher and the
difference of what people expect me to
be what I think people expect of me and
who I should be versus who I really am
and allowing myself to be that person
who is a little bit scared anxious has a
list can step on stage and kind of
embarrass himself a little bit so that's
something I've worked on and this public
speaking with part of that process of
working on all that but overall I would
before getting up there hands would be
shaking heart would be racing I wouldn't
even have concrete thoughts if these
people are going to think this about me
it was just like nerves kind of like
almost black almost like blacking out
nerves just like oh God here we go I got
to do this and as you mentioned
voluntarily doing it is the whole secret
to it so when I
started taking those nerves and those
butterflies and that kind of feeling in
my heart as a good sign as a chance for
grow growth and changing my perception
on okay me feeling this right now if I
step into this this is giving myself an
opportunity to grow and become something
better so try and enjoy that a little
bit more you know this is the feelings
of racing your heart of being fear
scared all these things it's part of the
human experience and I think feeling
anything is something great better than
feeling nothing at all so I started to
kind of try and enjoy it and be excited
for what would result of it and that's
kind of continuously helped and
obviously when you're stepping on stage
if your if your goal is for people to
like you you I've heard someone in the
past say I believe they said then you're
putting your self worth on the line
you're giving your self worth an issue
to be judged versus if you step on stage
and your only goal is to be yourself
then it doesn't matter if they accept
you or not because you can succeed just
by being yourself and that kind of leads
that can lead to even more
self-confidence obviously it's a better
goal to just be who you are rather than
have people like you it leads to a lot
more fulfilled happiness rather than a
false sense of reality of people liking
a false sense of yourself so that was a
huge process of what I kind of step
through and all that and like you said
you don't get less scared you get more
Brave even before getting on the podcast
I was a little bit nervous I still get
nervous now and I just I believe in
myself more I have more confidence from
my track record in the history and I'm
more Brave to step into it a little bit
more okay so you covered a bunch of
things there that I think are are
interesting and worth delving into it's
like okay what do you want when you step
on stage so let's say well you want
people to like you it's like well what
what the hell do you mean by that first
of all it's like what PE which people
and does that mean that you're going to
present a false front so that they like
that because that isn't you so if they
like that false front you you haven't
been humiliated I mean you you've
definitely circumvented that but it's
not like you got people to like you
because they don't know who you are so
that's not a really good victory like I
mean I understand why people might want
to craft what they're going to say so
they don't fail cataclysmically but
that's also not how you ever succeed as
a public speaker you know like so when I
go out on stage I wouldn't say I'm
nervous about it anymore but I've done
it so much now you know and and it's
certainly it takes a very long time
before you won't be nervous at all it's
not like I'm not pumped up and also
excited see that's another thing you
said is that you want to get
yourself into the frame of reference
where you're primarily grateful for the
opportunity and you're excited about it
like both of those so like when I'm
going out on stage my wife does this too
like we always take a moment or two to
remember how Bloody unlikely it is that
there's all these people gathered there
to hear us talk and remember the fact
that they're actually there because they
want to see success not
failure and so that allows you to step
on stage not with a mindset of Suspicion
and paranoia and distrust of the
audience which is part of the fear of
being judged but the recognition that
you're among people who wish you well
which is certainly going to be the case
for you in most most of the places that
you're speaking and anyone who isn't
there for that reason they're the sort
of mean-spirited person you shouldn't
really care about you shouldn't really
care about what they think anyways and
then with regards to what you're going
to say you
know if you're concentrating on how it
is that that people are reacting to you
then you're going to craft your words as
you pointed out so they like you but
that's a false game you know you could
just and this works like a charm as far
as I'm concerned is you could just
determine that you're going to say what
you believe to be true it's way simpler
like you might get into trouble for it
right now and then because you're going
to say things that you know maybe some
of the audience doesn't want to hear but
this is where you have to decide what
you're going to put your faith in you
know and like when I'm on stage when I'm
talking to people as far as I can manage
all I'm trying to do is to say what I
believe to be true and try to make my
thoughts clearer and the thing that's so
fun about that is that if I'm trying to
make my thoughts clearer to myself I'm
simultaneously doing the same thing for
the audience if I'm trying to track the
truth as I speak and move forward then
they can come along with me and then the
whole thing works out like it just
strips all it strips all the deception
out of it you know and Chris one of the
things too that I used to tell my
socially anxious clients or or or help
them conceptualize is that if you go to
a party and you're nervous you're
primarily concerned about whether or not
you're at ease like you're concerned
about your mental state but if you go to
a party and you're focused on making
other people comfortable and welcome
well first of all they'll be really
bloody happy about you because you'll be
attending to them but the fact that
you're attending to them stops that
self-consciousness it's about the only
thing I know that really works CU you
can't tell yourself just not to be
self-conscious and so when you're going
now like when you're going on stage or
even when you're going on a podcast
let's say what is it that you've learned
to focus on because
you're hypothetically you're not
focusing on your sweaty hands you're not
focusing in on your you know cuz you
said most of your responses are
physiological rather than than
thought-based in terms of what's what's
what's the manifestation of the fear
what are you now focused on when you're
trying to
communicate I mean part of stepping on
stage at least as I kind of mentioned I
actually am focusing on that physical
part there was a quote from Tim Grover
to Michael Jord from when he was younger
talking about instead of trying to fight
the butterflies just send them in the
right direction so when I start to feel
the butterflies in my stomach getting a
little nervous it's like all right you
know this is be this is because changing
my frame of mind rather than fear I'm
feeling these because I've worked really
hard to be here I'm very excited to be
here and I'm sure you know anxiousness
and excitement are almost the same thing
so if I can like allow myself to believe
how hard I've worked to be in this exact
position how long I've waited to hear
and of course I feel nervous and excited
because this is really important to me
so feel all these feelings right now
because I compete once a year so all my
year is working said words that one day
and on that day I want to feel
everything I can rather than numb
anything out and avoid it so I'm like
this is part of this experience that I'm
going to remember feeling nervous and
I've done this the history helps me I've
done this five times I've won seven
times I've been on the stage now I can
step on the stage with experience and I
can have these nerves and the nerves are
going to fade and I'm going to be left
out there purely being present and
joyful feeling all of it and I've just
had that experience to go through it and
a lot of it has come from doing it
numerous times the the work I'm doing
outside believing in myself and that
kind of change of frame and I mean the
understanding that fear anxious and
excitement are so similar that you don't
need to focus on it being anxiety and
bad rather it could be a good thing yeah
well okay so when you confront something
new let's say an opportunity on stage
especially if it's a high stakes
opportunity what your body basically
does is put itself in a position where
you're more primed to do everything and
and they this the physiologist
psychophysiologist calls that call that
uh heightened non-specific
arousal right and so that's really what
you're referring to and what your body
is doing is is saying well this is a
complex situation God only knows what
you're going to be called upon to do so
let's just crank everything up so that
you can respond rapidly if that's
necessary and that can easily tilt into
anxiety or it can shade into excitement
it's much more likely to tilt into
anxiety if you start to get afraid of
those responses right so you've learned
to reframe them you know as the kind of
excitement that you described people
fall into these feedback loops this is
what produces Panic by the way where
you're afraid you see that you're afraid
or at least you interpret those that
emotional state let's say as fear you
get afraid of the fear that makes the
fear Mount then you get more afraid of
that because the fear is mounted more
and you just spiral right and that can
turn into a full-blown panic attack and
so okay so you've learned instead to
attend to that and to and to I would say
interpret it in the best possible light
right it's a realistic light but it's
the best possible light you also pointed
to something else that everyone should
know see here's one of the things that
people do that tilts them very hard to
toward maintaining or increasing a
phobia or even something like fear of
public speaking so as you're approaching
your debut on stage let's say that
tendency for arousal is going to
increase and it's going to increase to a
maximum generally right before the event
begins now I'm sure you've observed this
if you don't run during that period see
if you run during that period then
you've learned that the event is
terrifying if you if you wait that out
and you actually go ahead with the event
what you'll find almost inevitably is
that that high level of arousal will
decrease once the event begins and then
you then you can see you've learned like
through practical experience that if you
just withstand the anxiety it will
decrease
now you you made illusion to the fact
that even in the bodybuilding
competitions where where you're not
speaking Yeah yeah maybe you can
differentiate that for us I mean you
said to some degree that you were
worried about being judged as a speaker
but then of course when you're on the on
the stage you're being judged on the
basis of your physique and your
performance and so it obviously it isn't
judgment per se
that's causing you to be nervous it's
more and that's where you referred it to
some of the things that had happened in
your childhood for example you know
proclivity for a lisp a bit and the fact
that you had experienced some public
humiliation doesn't take much for a kid
by the way especially when they're you
know standing up in front of a class one
bad experience like that can color you
for quite a long time how how do you
differentiate between what you feel when
you're on the
stage when you're being judged on the
basis of your physique and your work
compared to being evaluated with regard
to speaking how do those how are those
different for
you um I mean when I was younger and I
first started competing I felt a lot
more nerves but I didn't do any public
speaking events so it's hard for me to
compare that I'm sure I mean you can
actually look back to my Olympia speech
in 2019 when I won my first Olympia and
I like blurted some stuff out didn't
know what to say was like oh but I felt
super confident while on stage so when I
started there was more experience I had
in the bodybuilding aspect a lot more
experience of that compared to public
speaking so my anxiety and work on
public speaking really only start to
progress in the last 2 years where I've
had the last 10 years of competing to
work on that so right now I definitely
still have nerves in both but they're
much less in bodybuilding and I'm much
more able to change that frame of mind
like I mentioned of being able to enjoy
that excitement rather than be worried
about it and it feels easier for me to
perform physically and get on stage and
do what I need to do rather than start
to pull my thoughts together and speak
and all that stuff I'll notice I'll get
a lot more tongue twisted then I will
mess up my posing on stage so definitely
more difficult speaking but as you said
that fear of judgment feeling on stage I
do get a little bit on both but now the
bodybuilding aspect has transferred a
little bit more into pressure and
expectation because when I was younger I
felt it but it was a little bit
different cuz I was just new and nervous
but I was the underdog and no one really
cared there was nothing expected of me
so I was just feeling a youthful
nervousness and then now when I get up
there sometimes it's like okay people
are actually here to see me now and
expecting me to be be the best in the
world there is a standard that I have to
withhold and anything less than that if
I come second place that's bad now
whereas when I was younger if I came
second place that's amazing so any kind
of movement backwards it's just more
pressure so that's a different style of
expectation and pressure I feel from
being on stage vers the actual fear of
failure when I'm
speaking did you know a baby's heart
begins to beat at just 3 weeks and that
heartbeat is a baby's only defense in
the womb at 5 weeks a baby heartbeat can
be heard on ultrasound and that's where
pre-born steps in rescuing 200 babies
every day from abortion simply by
providing a mother with a free
ultrasound and allowing her to hear her
child's heartbeat and see that perfectly
formed body in the womb by 6 weeks the
baby's eyes are forming by 10 weeks a
baby is able to suck his or her thumb
pre-born needs our help to save these
precious souls for just $8 you could be
the difference between the life or death
of a baby and if you become a monthly
sponsor you'll receive stories and
ultrasound pictures of the lives you've
helped Rescue all gifts are tax
deductible and 100% of your gift
donation goes towards saving babies to
donate dial pound 250 and say the
keyword baby that's pound 250 baby or go
to preborn
docomo that's preborn dcom
Jordan right right well okay so there's
a couple of things there I mean the
first is that
know your comfort on stage performing
professionally was proportionate to some
degree to your degree of experience and
also to some
degree proportionate to your success
right because you could imagine that as
you got more successful you got more
confident but you know you're pointing
to something else that's a little deeper
than that too which is you don't want to
be duding yourself into thinking that
you're ever going to get to a point
where you have nothing on the line and
you're just without fear
that's why it's so much better to
practice being brave than it is to
assume that conquering fear means
absence of fear that isn't what it means
it means getting better and better at
being able to deal with fear because you
know one of the perverse things you're
pointing to is you know
someone seeing this from the outside
might think well you know what the hell
does Chris have to worry about I mean
he's already hit the peak of his
profession of course he can go out on
stage and be confident it there's no
nothing Brave about that because he's in
a an optimized position but you you know
you're giving us a Viewpoint from inside
which is yeah but the stakes have
changed now the Situation's different
and the the downside consequences are
different than they were and so the M
see I've I've seen this
often one of the things I saw among
professors was and students was that
they would
falsify the way they presented
themselves what they said what they
wrote because they weren't in a secure
position so an undergraduate would write
a false paper for a professor because
they had to get the grade and then as a
graduate student they'd write um they
wouldn't say what they really meant in a
seminar because they didn't want to
cause trouble with people who might
write them letters of reference and then
when they became Junior professors well
they didn't have tenure yet so they
still couldn't say what they thought and
then the next rung of professorship well
that's not all the way to the top so
there's still something to sacrifice and
people would falsify themselves you know
and it was based what they would tell
themselves is once I get into a position
of
security I'll be comfortable with who I
am and what I think and what I have to
say and then I'll start speaking but the
the lie about that is that you're never
going to get yourself in a position
where security makes you Brave that
isn't how life Works security doesn't
make you Brave what makes you Brave is
the decision that you're going to
confront things that you're afraid of
and even Su like the people I know that
are radically successful and obviously
you're one of them in in your
domain it's not
like they're now bereft of challenges
like in some ways the challenges
actually get bigger you know with when
you're playing a higher Stakes game so
and I'm I'm saying this as as you know
is that to let everybody know that
you're never going to be in a situation
if you're especially if you're pushing
yourself forward where you're not
confronting something that is a genuine
threat and a genuine Challenge and you
should you can get yourself in a place
where you're actually happy about that
you know so why do you keep let's delve
into that a little bit you've won five
championships right and so one of the
questions that someone might ask is well
why continue like why do you continue to
do this what's what's driving you
forward
still I mean it's a great question and
it's one I've I've been been honestly
asking myself for the past couple of
years especially this year there's been
times where the risk versus reward
hasn't felt like it's all there for me
and you know now my wife is pregnant I'm
having a child life's changing I'm
getting older there's a lot of stuff
coming into my life and I've been asking
myself that a lot and it's definitely
it's not so much being a champion that I
love and I have this thing called
Champion mentality and I say how it's
not about the trophies or the medals
around your neck it's kind of more about
the person I've become in this journey
and I've heard you speak a lot about how
humans take value from the uphill climb
you know we it's finding a new challenge
climbing that mountain that's where we
find Value and growth in ourselves and
I've almost become addicted or just
fallen in love with the self-discovery
and growth that I have discovered
through bodybuilding by pushing my
limits physically and mentally by going
through states of suffering overcoming
these odds that hit me at the worst
times and being able to see how far I
can take a goal and how far I can push
myself I've fallen in love with that
growth that has come with that and so
that's continuously what pushes me and
we spoke about the feelings I have on
stage and I think a lot of successful
people and myself have gotten really
good at things for our ability to
compartmentalize and to suppress things
and continue to work as things are going
on but what I realized from a young age
was that if I suppress things
compartmentalized and push them to the
side for too long without keeping them
back up I start to suppress everything
so the kind of thing I said at the end
of this year was if you numb the bad you
numb the good you start to numb your
whole life and you start to feel less
and be less present and I didn't want to
be that person anymore so partway
through my career I was like I'm winning
but what I feel is relief that it's over
at the end I want to feel Joy I want to
fear the feel the fear and anxiety
before and the joy afterwards all of it
rather than nothing so that was a huge
transition that I've pushed through in
the last few years and it's pretty cool
cuz I've documented a lot of my preps my
friend Calvin here has been my
videographer through everything and you
can see almost a shift in previous years
of where I was a lot more stoic and
hard-faced to being a little bit more
light-hearted and laughing and joyful
hanging out with people backstage before
getting on stage because I'm really
present and enjoying all that and that's
because when challenges come up in the
middle of prep which they always have I
I tore my lad I injured myself this year
I have an autoimmune disease as well
which has affected me in the past and
having to overcome those things if I
allow myself to feel that fear and
stress and sadness and let out my tears
and cry with my girlfriend who's
supported me or my wife now and be able
to move through that then when I'm in a
position of joy and success I feel way
more joy and success I'm able to embrace
all that a lot more so that's part of
the personal growth that I've discovered
through bodybuilding and obviously I'm
only 28 year old I know there's so much
more for me to discover part of me is
almost worried if I step away from this
mountain am I going to have something
challenging enough to continue to push
myself enough to grow and obviously I
believe there is especially fatherhood
is going to be a whole new challenge
that will teach me a whole new lessons
yep yep definitely yep but honestly even
a question I could ask you is cuz you've
I touched on you've mentioned it's the
uphill battle that brings value and when
you reach the Pinnacle of that mountain
what you want to see is another higher
mountain in distance in the distance for
you to accomplish y y but what do you do
when the previous years have felt like
Mount Everest and just's a lot of
suffering a lot of difficulties a lot of
pain had to push through a lot of joy as
well but you almost want to step back
and be like okay do I need to find a
higher Mountain than this a more
difficult challenge to continue to grow
and to find more value or can I maybe
find a more lateral Mountain a sideway
movement rather than an upward movement
and I mean that's it's a question where
I well I think well I think some of it
look you could imagine that there are a
variety of of of really quite
qualitatively different mountains to
climb the height might not be so much
the issue although it's one issue as the
diversity of the clim so imagine there's
two ways of making progress right you
can go up a more and more difficult
terrain which you've already done with
the Olympia contest you went up a very
difficult Mountain a very steep Mountain
all the way to the top but then you know
now you're at the Pinnacle you could
look around you could see oh well
there's all sorts of different places to
climb okay and one way of becoming a
better person is to do something very
difficult and to attain a pinnacle but
another way to become a good person like
a fully-fledged person is to take on a
lot of different challenges and you
don't have to be like every single
challenge you have to that you're going
to undertake doesn't necessarily have to
be another Mount Everest right because
there's something to be said for many
different climbs now in your own life
you know you mentioned two things that
are right there in front of you mean the
first is that you're going to be a
father okay well that's going to that's
going to keep you busy like that's a
bottomless well you know it's it's an
opportunity and a challenge and there's
no limit to how good you could become at
that right there's no limit to how good
a mentor you could be to your son or
your daughter there's no limit to how
good a relationship you could establish
with them with them if you made that a
priority so you know that's something
right there that could easily occupy
like a third of your life cuz it's it's
a big deal and that'll that area of
opportunity will grow up even more if
you have more kids right because well
then there's more challenges of that
sort and then you also have your
marriage right and that's something one
of the things I've discovered with my
wife and this has really become more
tangible for us in the last few years
because both of us almost died and not
just a little bit like brutally and over
you know months and years it was very
rough and one of the consequences of
that was like we were apart really
because of our illnesses various
illnesses we were apart for Something
approximating 2 to three years depending
on how you look at it and we grew apart
during that period as you do because
that's a long time um but we've
found new depths to our relationship
that we didn't know were achievable in
the aftermath of that and so I think
there's there's no end to the depth
there's no end to the mountain that you
can climb with your wife and that's even
more true once you have kids together so
you've got that now you also
said you're working on your ability as a
public Communicator well that's
something that's there for you because
you've already got a huge following you
know people are interested in you
because you've mastered a particular
discipline and so you have the
opportunity to continue to do good on
that front that would be proportionate
to the to your developing ability to
express yourself and so you know we have
this program online called future
authoring it's at selfauthoring.com
and we try to help walk people through
the problem we're discussing with that
program so this is how it works we might
as well walk through this a little bit
this is how it works generically
it's like okay imagine yourself five
years in the
future okay now here's the here's the
deal and here are the
conditions the condition
is you have to imagine
yourself as if you were trying to take
care of yourself like you were someone
you cared for so you could imagine
someone you care for like your wife
maybe and you could think okay if I
cared for myself like I cared for
someone I love what would I want for
myself 5 Years From the road what sort
of person would I want to be what sort
of challenges would I be facing what
would I have around me how would I like
my life to be but more importantly what
sort of character would I like to be and
then you you have to ask yourself that
you know and you'll get a vision and
some of it'll be concentrating on the
remediation of your flaws because maybe
part of you will go well you know here's
some of the things you do wrong that you
know are wrong and here's ways you could
sort that up and out and clean it up you
know you could become a better public
speaker for example you could take note
of the things you're afraid of and that
you're avoiding and you could decide
that you're going to face those and fix
them so that's and then on the other
side you'd say well you know what are
you interested and excited about that
you could pursue and so you want to
develop a vision and it's it's really
you do that in dialogue honest dialogue
with yourself it's like okay
I'm taking care of myself what do I want
and then we broke it down in this
process because if you ask someone what
they want for their life that's a pretty
hard question you know it's so
open-ended it's so large but then you
can differentiate it you know people
used to come to me as a therapist or as
a professor and they'd say well I don't
know what to do with my life you know
I'd say well what do you want say well I
don't know what I want I don't know what
to do with my life it's okay fair enough
if you don't know what to do with your
life look at what other people do that
works and maybe think about how you're
doing there so you could imagine this
what sort of people do you want to be
surrounded by you know what sort of
friends do you want and what can you
offer those people how do you want your
family to be functioning not be your
wife and your kids but also your
extended family you know how could you
repair those relationships or make them
grow what educational opportunities
could you pursue know how are you going
to take care of yourself mentally and
physically what occupation are you going
to pursue and how are you going to make
that Thrive and what are you going to do
with your life outside of your work and
then more broadly speaking you might say
too how could you be of the broadest
possible service to other people now
each of those is a microvision right and
that what that does is it provides for
you because you you you you pointed out
something extremely important there you
know you said you fell in love with the
process of climbing mountains right and
that speaks also to your motivation to
continue pursuing your bodybuilding
which is you know an extreme
preoccupation a difficult preoccupation
people might say well why do you do it
and you know your answer so far has been
well you like climbing mountains and
then you might say well then the mark of
your success isn't going to be which
mountain you climbed the mark of your
success is going to be how good you've
become at climbing whatever Mountain
presents itself in front of you and then
the goal would be something like
what would you say the eventual Mastery
of as many mountains as you could
possibly manage so one of the things
that kept me motivated as a professor
has kept me motivated all my life it's
like I I've
asked how much can I do in the shortest
possible
time like and that's such a fun game to
play and I pretty much take that
question into everything I do you know
it's like where could I see this going
and then the question of efficiency well
that's partly because well if you want
to do 10 things you're going to have to
do them pretty efficiently because
otherwise you won't have the time but
then you get in that challenge mindset
right it's like okay here's an
opportunity now sorry I'm rambling a bit
here but I wanted to point out one other
thing you you pointed to that's very
very important you know you said that as
you've mastered the current discipline
that you're pursuing you're more and
more able to do it playfully mhm you
know that you have more fun backstage
you know that you're joking around more
that and I would say that's also if
you're looking for a marker of Mastery
that's the primary one you've really
mastered something if you can do it in a
spirit of play and this is something to
really know about the baby that you're
going to have like one of the things
that kids love playing and one of the
things they can deliver to you as a
benefit is to pull you into that play
and there isn't anything that they want
more than that and there isn't anything
that they need more than that and men
can really offer that to children now
it's you know not so easy when they're
six months old and younger but after
that man the the field of play is open
and you can have an immensely productive
relationship with your kids an
unbelievably enjoyable relationship if
you introduce and focus on that Spirit
of play you are at a pinnacle in your
career and as you said you're you're not
a you're not very old you've got a lot
of life ahead of you like what do you
think and you talked about fatherhood in
your marriage what do you think is
beckoning to you and also calling to
your conscience like where do you see
your life progressing I know that's a
complicated question yeah for sure I
mean I've always been pretty transparent
that bodybuilding isn't forever for me
I'm grateful I got successful at a young
age so I can retire at a young age I
always said I wouldn't go past 30 so now
that I'm approaching that age I'm coming
to that point where I'm like coming to
the understanding that there isn't going
to be one mountain there's going to be
many and also this past year I had a lot
of things on my plate and I spread
myself a little bit too thin and I
wasn't able to compete at the level I
wanted to at the beginning of the year
and I read this book called The one
thing and it was talking about how if
you want to be like the top 1% in
something you need to focus on that one
thing and so I kind of realized I was
spread I was trying to be too good
wearing too many hats while still being
Mr Olympia but it also showed me if I
want to be the best father I can be the
best husband I can be the best
businessman the best everything I can be
bodybuilding is going to take away from
that at least for parts of the year so
if I want to be at least like top 5% in
a lot of these things I can work really
hard at that but if body building is
still being the best in the world for me
at least it takes a lot out of me
therefore it's sacrificing from other
things and I started to notice that and
that's not what I wanted a biggest the
biggest goal I've ever had in my life
and I've always said this why I'm so
excited right now was to be the best
father I can be and in turn also the
best husband I can be because my biggest
role model in my whole life was my
father and the impact he had on me I was
always feel grateful for it and being
able to think of the impact I can have
on another child is something that
really excites me and backtracking a
little bit when you were asking me what
motivates me to keep going that's one of
the biggest things that keeps me going
is some of some of the stories I have
heard from people who have followed my
journey you know I've worked hard like
I've said on on being my true self
through it all by showing a lot of
things and honestly I've been very
grateful for everything you've put out
because you have also been a great role
model for men you're very intelligent
well spoken all these things but you can
also be very vulnerable you know you
you're not afraid to cry when something
is very pass you're passionate about and
I've noticed myself I'm a crier
sometimes I just start crying and I've
expressed that I've cried on stage after
olympas I've cried on videos talking
about stuff that scares me I've talked
about my list which is the vulnerability
and since doing that more I've had more
and more kids come up to me and share
those kind of same things with me and
this past year at the Olympia I
had I don't know if he was 12 or 13
years old he was a young boy and he came
up to me not able to speak too well with
tears in his eyes just thanking me for
all I had done for him and how I had
helped him and he handed me a note he
handed me a letter because he said he
wouldn't be able to get all those words
out and I I thanked them give him a hug
took a picture and kind of went about
and then few hours later I was waiting
eating some food it was a night before
the Olympia getting on stage the next
day I opened up his letter and I started
to read it and he expressed how he had
Tourettes and he remembers hearing me
talking about my lisp and how I was
embarrassed about it and how I still
have moments where I brings me back to
my child feeling embarrassed but working
through all that stuff and he talked
about the impact that it had on him and
how he'd been bullied and how sad he'
been the past but how he's building up
all this courage that he pulls a lot
from me and it was a very nice heartfelt
note and I said backstage or back where
I was at the time just crying like
sobbing just tears running down my face
just it still makes me emotional when I
think about it now just feeling so
grateful for the impact that the work
I'm doing for myself and my family is
also having on the community around me
and that story and that feeling alone
filled me with so
much energy to keep doing what I'm doing
and like a belief that I'm on the right
path and so that really that just it
just felt right I'm like I'm where I
need to be right now and this is this is
why I do it this is why I'm putting
myself out there at the same time of
putting this much work into something
and I like I said bodybuilding is
forever I understand they'll so when I
bring down to a bunch of other mountains
I would like to I've put a lot of focus
on my relationship over the past few
years and that will never stop the
amount of Joy I've gotten from that like
you said it's an endless battle I want
to put that energy into being the father
I can be and I want those lessons I have
of being able to help other people in
the bodybuilding Community or these
other kids who follow me I want to be
able to apply more to them more to my
family more to my children and all the
above and I I really realized that the
beginning of my career was a little bit
more selfish more external chasing after
things making myself better and now that
I've realized I still have endless
amount of growth to go but I've have
enough growth inside of me where I can
help others grow too that's that's like
the biggest thing I'm I'm excited and
passionate about it's what has kept me
bodybuilding at least for the last year
and if I do another one it will be be a
huge part of that as well and a huge
part while while I bodybuild I share the
ups and downs and the fears and the
excitements of the entire
Journey starting a business can be tough
especially knowing how to run your
online storefront thanks to Shopify it's
easier than ever Shopify is the global
Commerce platform that helps you sell at
every stage of your business from the
launch your online shop stage all the
way to the did we just hit a million
orders stage Shopify is there to help
you grow our marketing team uses Shopify
every to sell our merchandise and we
love how easy it is to add more items
ship products and track conversions
Shopify helps you turn browsers into
buyers with the internet's best
converting checkout up to 36% better
compared to other leading Commerce
platforms no matter how big you want to
grow Shopify gives you everything you
need to take control and take your
business to the next level sign up for a
$1 per month trial period at shopify.com
sjbp go to shopify.com jbp now to grow
your business no matter what stage
you're at that's shopify.com
[Music]
jvp right right so you can see that as
you said that that your progression has
been you know that you focused in a very
disciplined manner on one thing and and
to some degree that was something that
served your own individual interests
particularly well but that as you've got
better and better at that and become
more successful at that the relationship
with you have you have with your wife is
is beckoning as extremely important the
potential relationship with your child
and also this pleasure that you see and
take in modeling discipline for people
and also mentoring them so I just had a
chat with Joo willink and Joo is quite
the bloody monster and very disciplined
man you know and he's joked with me
several times that you know if he'd
taken a few wrong turns when he was a a
young man he could have easily been a
criminal type cuz he he a tough son of a
you know one of the things that
really changed Joo cuz we talked about
this to some degree was his experience
in the
military and I think he was interested
in the military to begin
with perhaps for some of the same
reasons that you were interested in
bodybuilding you know it was the
personal self-development element of it
but what he learned as a leader in the
military was that he had the opportunity
to
model appropriate conduct for other
people and to help them develop and he
said he he didn't ever find anything
that was more meaningful than that like
that was even more exciting than
excitement that was more exciting than
Adventure certainly more exciting and
worthwhile than anything you know kind
of troublemaking criminal Adventure
which does have that adventurous element
to it you know it's it's like we it's
why we like watching bad guys in movies
you know it's at least they're not
sitting around doing nothing you know
and so
but the it certainly it's been true in
my life too that I don't think there is
a deep deeper pleasure and a more
sustainable
pleasure once you've learned to walk up
mountains let's say with some degree of
facility than to see the positive effect
that observing that has on other people
and then also to Foster that and you
certainly have a walloping opportunity
to do that as a father and then you know
you I want to talk about a couple of
things you also
mentioned this is a particular conundrum
that men have I would say even more than
women but to be extremely successful at
something you know the top 1% you said
and you're actually above that in your
particular
discipline you really have to be
hyperfocused on it like the great
scientists that I've known I worked at
Harvard for six years and the senior
professors there I was an assoc
assistant and associate not a full
Professor the full professors were guys
who were at the Pinnacle of their career
and they were at the Pinnacle of that
type of career period because Harvard
would go around the world and find those
mostly men and aggregate them together
and so then you might ask well what do
you have to be like to be someone like
that and the answer is well being smart
that's like pretty necessary and that's
kind of a gift that's given to you by
Fate In God like you can interfere with
it but if it's not there naturally you
know it's a real impediment um it's sort
of like height you know if you don't
have it there's not a lot you can do to
get it
um but then insane dedication is the
next thing like if you want to be the
best of the best you're going to be
working flat out like 16 hours a day 7
days a
week hopefully not exhausting yourself
because you're in one hell of a
competitive environment and there's real
utility in that especially for men
because if you get really good at one
thing there's the cascading benefits
that you pointed to for example when you
found when you started to to work out in
the gym when you were 14 that you were
getting more you know you get more
attention from girls because of it MH so
but the price you pay is that it's
harder to do many things at once and you
said you've come to realize that if you
want to compete at the highest level
that that is there's opportunity cost
there you know that's going to make it
more difficult for you to be well 100%
committed to the other things that you
have to do and want to do it's hard to
get that balance right and you know it's
probably the case I don't know this for
sure but it's probably the case that as
you move forward and you step back from
this particular obsessive concern that
you'll have the opportunity to grow
let's say in a more balanced way and to
pull out of that a more comprehensively
developed personality you know and that
is something you the advantage to doing
that is that there's no limit to it you
know I don't care how good you get at
public speaking for example you could
still get better there's no and I don't
care how good you are as a father
there's no limit to because you could be
a father to a lot of people as you found
out you know when that kid gave you the
note not least when that kid gave you
the note so you know that's definitely
an exciting Horizon of
opportunities um what's been your
experience you said that you know we
talked a little bit about your fears
today we talked a little bit about how
you overcome them how also they were
linked to things about yourself that you
regarded as
inadequacies you we talked a little bit
about public displays of emotion around
that or maybe admission of that you said
your your observation has been that you
doing
that like it's like admitting to your
weaknesses at the same time that you're
celebrating your successes right it's
that balance you can imagine why that
would be inviting for people
because they might look at your success
and thinkoh my God there's no way I
could do anything like that you know you
must be some sort of superhuman creature
to manage that but then when they hear
oh no you know you manage that despite
the fact that you have an array of
insufficiencies that's where the person
that might be a place where the
especially the younger guys they can
identify with you more clearly a so an
honest admission of that kind of opens
the door to them they might be able to
think well if if if he could do it under
those conditions I could do it under the
conditions in my own life that's the
advantage of that emotional honesty
maybe e yeah for sure and I mean you
spoke at the beginning we're talking
about and you always speak about
speaking the truth and I I almost fell
across this way of living by accident
because when I would be nervous all I
could think of to do was to speak the
truth and if I was on stage and I was
nervous something I would just start by
saying I'm up here and I'm really
anxious right now and people would be
like oh like that relatability he's
human like they start to see past that
and then I lighten up a little bit
there's no more false falsehood I have
to put on pretending like I I'm not
anxious or something so that really
helped me a lot and yeah it's it's been
a process for sure but it's helped a lot
and like you said a lot of people have
viewed me it's funny there's an internet
term people call and they started
calling me a dad in the fitness industry
and it was quite a it's quite ironic
because I wanted to be a father so bad
and that's when I really started to
realize the the responsibility that came
in the position I'm in and I mentioned
the champion mentality and I use that as
kind of a brainstorming topic I
continuously go back to and adjust what
that definition means to me and I grew
up looking up to people like Kobe Bryant
Michael Jordan Tom Brady all these
highlevel athletes but when you take a
zoom out at their life most of them
don't have long lasting at least not
happy relationships they typically end
partway through or near the end of their
career which in my mind starts to look
like these high level of success is
requiring them to sacrifice their
connection and relationship to be where
they are and I started to realize that's
not what I want and the rule I have of
champion mentality is not about any
rules to it it's just about how you do
it I can do it and I can make my own
rules as long as I'm feeling like I'm
winning I'm progressing I'm growing
doesn't matter about the medals or
anything outside of that it just matters
the progress I'm making and so I wasn't
willing to sacrifice my relationship or
if I started to sacrifice my
relationship I pull back from
bodybuilding I had a few more guidelines
that I wasn't willing to give up on and
seeing the responsibility I have to
people looking up to me I believe that
younger kids looking up and chasing
success longterm are going to be happier
while still focusing on connection and
meaningful relationships without
sacrificing those just to become
successful because anyone can see at the
if you're at the top of the mountain
alone you're alone right well you know
the other thing too is that and I'm
interested maybe and how you've managed
this you know cuz we could say well your
relationship is something that could
interfere with your bodybuilding right
cuz time is a zero sum game but then we
could say well no no not necessarily
like if you got your relationship in
order well first of all you wouldn't be
wasting time chasing other women and and
and falling into whatever pitfalls and
complexities might be associated with
that plus you could ally yourself with
someone who was there for your support
and who was along with you for the ride
you know assuming that she could find a
way that would also fulfill her own
goals so and that's a better Vision
right I mean it's certainly the case
since I've hit the road in 2017 you know
my wife and I
have negotiated and searched to find
where she fits into that not shoehorned
in you know and and not as a necessary
accompaniment not not that at all but in
a way that would bolster the entire
Endeavor and also keep the relationship
strong so how long have you been with
your with wife or fiance fiance or wife
at the moment wife we've been together
for five and a half years yeah how long
have you been
married uh less than a year okay okay so
you're in your first year of marriage
what do you think that what do you think
you've done right and what has she had
done right that's enabled you guys to
develop this relationship to to move
towards marriage to decide to have a
baby well you're pursuing this very very
specific and difficult goal what have
you both done right let's start with her
what do you think she's done
right
um she has definitely taken a full
responsibility for where she needs to
come in
and I the biggest thing that comes into
my mind is we don't leave any monsters
under the bed we don't leave anything
under touch or the dragon as you've
mentioned we we do we do not not allow
that and at the beginning of our
relationship we've been through some
hell we've been through some chaos we've
been through some fights and we've been
through some but we're at a point
now where because we have processed all
those we fought through them we pulled
each other apart and then back together
and we went through that dance now we
understand each other so much and
there's nothing there's nothing under
the rug our carpet's flat it's all on
the surface we've committed to speaking
the truth speaking to how we feel and
not allowing anything go between and I
mean she's done great at holding me very
accountable she she's no pushover I
don't get away with anything really if I
if I come in with a bit of an attitude
or even talk about making me better as a
bodybuilder too if I'm a little Snappy
because I'm dieting or tired she won't
have it she won't let it go she's like
she holds me to a high standard she
knows what I'm capable of and that holds
myself to that standard where I know
that she's doing that because she loves
me she's willing to call me out for my
faults and make the best version of me
because of how much she loves me and
values our relationship and I think that
ability to communicate and to to work
and battle through the problems rather
than push them aside and move over and
wait till there's too many of them
piling up to face it's allowed us to
like I said we've gone through some fire
in the past but now we're in such a
stable place where when I found out she
was pregnant and we're getting married
there's no fear there's no what if
there's no oh my God there's just pure
excitement and absolute confidence and
Trust because we know we can get through
it together anything so I think that's
the greatest thing well that pure
excitement the emergence of that pure
excitement you know and that I think
that's particularly true when it when it
emerges as the spirit of play that we
were talking about before you know I
mean there isn't anything
more really that kids like boys and
girls playing together than playing
house successfully you know and and
that's a game for kids but if you do it
right as an adult it's a game too and
you could imagine that if you got all
the monsters out from underneath the rug
and dispensed with them so they weren't
cluttering up your house that you could
do something like entertain the
possibility of having a family in
nothing but in almost nothing but a
spirit of excitement so so I think you
know the other thing I've noticed is
that if you clear away all those lurking
skeletons in the closet or dragons under
the
carpet then that Spirit of play can
emerge right and then that that's when
your relationship is optimized what do
you think how did you guys go
about jointly Det determining that you
were going to face the issues your own
personal issues and the issues in your
relationship instead of pretending they
weren't there and how did you negotiate
your commitment to the truth within your
relationship I think I think it was a
bit of a a bit of a dance when we first
met she has had she had a much more
difficult childhood than me and some
stuff some stuff that she was processing
still and those were more on the surface
and I was the one looking back at my
past with Rose Colored Glasses thinking
I had it all good and myself was a
little bit deeper under the rug and so
as stuff started to come up I I I think
I think part of it comes from myself I
grew up in a family that wasn't always
great at communicating about things and
so when I was entering relationship I
wasn't going to have the same thing I
was going to make sure everything was
spoken about and brought to the surface
and work through and at first she didn't
love that about me it wasn't always fun
but it allowed us to continuously grow
stronger and build trust as I started to
see the worst of her and she started to
show me the worst of her and I started
to show her the worst of me and we
realized we were still together and we
weren't running away from each other we
started to build a lot more trust and
it's like okay I can show you my deepest
darkest self that no one else gets to
see and you still love me like that's
powerful and same with me that's a good
deal y I know for a fact that she's
allowed me to be all myself she's seen
me at my weakest at my worst and all
these things and she hasn't run away
she's pulled me in closer and and you
talked a bit
about relationships not sacrificing or
taking away from success but actually
being able to add to it and that's where
she's really helped me because she has
understood so much of it that she has
pulled out all the realness in me and as
I'm trying to feel and process emotions
she would be able to see on my face if
something was like off and she would ask
me are you okay and I'd be like I'm fine
I'm good and I'm very good at hiding
that but she's very good at seeing it
now and she' ask me 10 times what what's
going on what's going on pull it out all
of a sudden I start breaking down crying
and I didn't even realize what was in me
myself and I'm not wanting my wife to
see me in this point of weakness because
I feel maybe I would be judged and I've
had a lot of men as I've spoken about
this tell me I couldn't tell my wife
that she would judge me too much she
would leave me if I broke down crying in
front of her like that she didn't she
pulled me in closer and she was like
told me every single time she like I
know this is difficult I know there's a
lot of pressure on you right now you can
quit if you want I will love you
regardless but I believe in you to get
through this and you will get through
this if you choose to and she instilled
that confidence in me and it's that
dance we've had back and forth where it
started with me pulling it a little bit
of her and then now that she's in a much
better place she's able to start pulling
the things out of me and we show each
other the dark sides and we've pulled
each other closer and closer over the
years to now this point where we have
this pure excitement bringing a child
together which is the ultimate form of
connection and trust that you need it's
it's it's the most beautiful thing and
it's something that I'm very grateful to
share because nothing's more meaningful
in life than getting to share these
experiences and these moments I have
with someone who loves you and sees you
for all of who you are yeah yeah well
that was all good Chris I mean I mean I
I like that story a lot it it's it has
the Ring of truth about it I really like
two things you said the first was it's
so it's so interesting a because you
said that when your relationship
started her
issues things those would be problems
that she brought to the situation that
had remained un solve to some degree
that's what baggage is it's like
impediments to people's development that
they haven't been able to overcome or
conceptualize properly you said hers
were more on the surface right and so
you could you played the role of the
person who was willing to confront those
and you guys got through them and
dispensed with them and then things
turned around a so because once she got
better at that the things you said the
things that were about you that were
perhaps not as evident on the surface
those started to emerge and could be
dealt with you know and so so that's
cool and and I think it's realistic I I
don't think it matters in a couple where
you start delving into problems you
delve into the problems that make
themselves manifest if you do that
honestly together you'll end up dealing
with all of the problems right it
doesn't matter who they are they're
going to they're going to rise up and
you're going to be able to confront them
you know and then you said
that having done that successfully
partly because she is bonded to you in
this vow she isn't going to run away
when she sees the parts of you that
aren't everything you might hope they
would be at that moment and that means
that you can what that actually means
instead of making it worse it means that
you can actually admit to and confront
your problems so that you have some
possibility of solving them because you
know it is
humiliating in the in the true sense
to notice that you had a problem you
didn't even know you had you know but
it's it certainly gives you an
opportunity then you know it's there man
and then you guys can take it on and you
concluded all that by saying that there
isn't anything better than having the
opportunity to share your success with
someone you love and I actually think to
some degree if that's not the
fundamental benefit of marriage it's
certainly one of the benefits like
working through your problems jointly
that's a major one and whatever pleasure
you get out of each other's company
that's a major one but this this ability
that a long-term relationship has to
allow you
to it deepens your experiences e the the
fact that you have someone to share them
with it makes your own
triumphs much more real and much more
profound to have someone along for for
the adventure and then you also have the
same opportunity
in relationship to their
successes that's a good deal for sure
yeah and especially as I was talking
about her pulling out
those those fears and those things in me
that I'm holding in and seeing all that
and truly seeing all of me and
everything that it takes to to become Mr
Olympia or to get through whatever I'm
getting through and then be together at
the end and to step off stage and go
behind the curtains and to see her there
looking me with tears in her eyes like
getting emotional now thinking about
those moments and being able to embrace
her and in that moment feel that this
person you're holding who you love has
seen the entire Journey with you you
don't feel alone at all there's no like
standing on stage being like you don't
know what I went through no you she seen
and she felt everything I've been
through and she was beside me the whole
way and therefore we are both able to
feel this Victory together it's hers as
much as it is mine so that's as you
mentioned there's there's nothing more
beautiful than that right right well
then yeah well that's the most real part
of whole celebration because I mean you
get the award and you get the public
Acclaim and you get the Triumph but if
you've been honest with your wife and
all of the problems that went along with
that all the obstacles that went along
with that have been laid out and you
overcame them jointly then the true
celebration in in the deepest sense is
actually the one with her because she
knows the story better than anyone else
mhm yeah absolutely yeah yeah yeah
that's a good deal that's definitely a
good deal so when is when is when is
your child going to be born uh baby girl
is going to be born in
April in April so you've got about three
months oh yeah okay okay so your wife is
pretty pregnant at the moment she pretty
pregnant yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah those
last few months that's I just I just
watched my daughter go through that
because she had a baby in mid December
and so we were there for about a about
the month leading up to that yeah and
that those last couple of months of
pregnancy that's quite the well the
whole thing is quite the trip but the
last few months in particular for sure
yeah obviously too as a as a man Your
Role at the beginning of the child as
you mentioned that Spirit of play
doesn't really come in until they're a
little bit older which is easier for a
man what would you say is some good tips
for me entering this right now
especially for that first phase that's a
good question well look the de when
after my wife and I got married I was
about 28 or or so and she's a year older
than me she was ready to have a baby
pretty much right away and I still
wasn't firmly situated in my career
although my prospects were good I wasn't
worried about it and I wasn't in a hurry
but she was more in a hurry and I
thought well I don't want to stop her
from doing something that she wants so
why am I resistant to this so I went for
a walk and I thought about it and I
thought okay well I have things to do to
finish develop my career and I have to
do them right now I was finishing up my
PhD and like I have to do that there's
no way around that and so nothing can
interfere with that because that's not
going to be good for me or for my family
so that's one possibility and then I
thought well also I don't know what the
hell to do with an infant like it's not
in my and look I'm relatively maternal
man I worked with little kids I worked
in dayc carees like I like little kids
and so I would I'm more prone to take
care of little kids than most men by by
temperament but even so like infants I
don't know what the hell to do with an
infant so I thought oh I'll maybe that's
the problem I don't have any problem
with kids at all once they're sort of
ambulatory like older than nine months
let's say and by the way you can start
playing with a baby very very early like
the play is very subtle you know I had
taken my granddaughter my son's daughter
and put her on my knees standing up when
she was about 4 months old and I got her
to play a head bonking game you know I'd
bring her forward and bonk my head on
hers I'd go 1 two three Bonk like really
lightly obviously and then wait because
babies are slow way they their pace is
slow 1 two 3 Bonk and then I did that
like five six times so she knew the
pattern and then I went one two three
and pulled her forward but didn't Bonk
her and she laughed and I thought Hey
kid you got the game you know you
establish that little pattern and then
deviate from it that's the game it's
like peekaboo too you know it's like
it's a surprise there's a bit of
surprise in it so you can start playing
with a baby very early it's very subtle
to begin with but I would say so know
that know that that you can start
playing and and interacting very early
so and that's a good thing to have at
the back of your mind and that ability
to play just gets more and more
important as the baby gets older but I
would also say that your
role is to take care of your wife while
she takes care of the
baby so that means you got to watch her
cuz this is going to tire her out like
it's a it's a fullbody experience for a
woman right I mean first of all she's
pregnant and that's a hell of a thing
especially in the last month then she
has to give birth
and you
know I I think that's something men have
no real comprehension of and then she
has to recover and then that baby is
like
desperately vulnerable and
requires everything the woman has to
provide for the first absolutely for the
first two months and pretty much
absolutely for the first six months so
you got to stand in the background and
you got to watch her and you got to make
sure that she doesn't get overwhelmed
because that's when you need to be in
there you need to go in and say look you
know you need a rest you need to have a
nap you I'll take care of the baby I'll
watch and so everything's going fine and
I'll wake you up if it's NE necessary
but you got to spell her off and so you
need to make that Arrangement and uh
that's the primary you know you think
that's how it looks to me is her primary
responsibility is to take care of the
baby and your primary responsibility is
take care of her and and then you have
to understand that she's going to be
gone from
you for like six
months and if you can engage in that
wholeheartedly you can get to know the
baby and you can set the stage so that
that baby is really well attached to the
mother like firmly and that'll save you
so godamn much trouble for the rest of
your life you can hardly imagine it
because that initial
bonding that's what provides the
scaffold of security like the physical
scaffold of security for that new person
and if that's disrupted it's real
trouble so you know in six months it's
not you know an instant
but she's going to come
back and then you'll also have when when
when my son was born when Julian was
born my daughter Mela was only a year
and a half old and that's a bit of a
tricky age Gap because a year and a half
old kid still needs her mother quite a
lot and then you have a new baby and if
you have a year and a half old kid and
then a new baby that the year and half
old kid looks like a teenager it's like
they're not a baby anymore compared to a
newborn and so they can easily get kind
of shunted aside and that can produce a
lot of sibling rivalry and jealousy and
bitterness and alienation on the part of
the older child so we taught her very
early to take care of the new baby and
to understand that if she established a
relationship with him you know that
would
be a benefit that she could derive from
the new situation she'd have three
people to love instead of two and that's
a good deal the same applies here in
relationship to your wife and the new
child it's like you're going to have to
let your wife go for six months but if
you're very careful with that as I'm
sure you will be and you really take
care of her you know she'll come back to
you and then you'll have this other
person a daughter you'll never have
anybody in your life who loves you as
much as your daughter will mhm like if
you do that right and it'll be the same
if you have a son and that is a bloody
good deal tell you man I loved hanging
around my when my kids were little I
would way rather be with them than
anyone else they were fun you know and
that's it helps if you have the right
disciplinary structure in relationship
to your kids and you've worked that out
with your wife so I have a rule it's a
very good rule you know don't let your
kids do anything that makes you dislike
them and if you discuss that with your
wife and you make that a rule you know
you can note to each other that kid's
annoying us that kid's being annoying
and then you can work together and you
think okay what's annoying how do we
stop it because if he's annoying you
he's going to annoy everybody else and
if he's annoying no one will like him
it's not good for the kid but if you can
get that right you'll there'll be
nothing more enjoyable that you do in
your whole life than spend time with
your little kids because they really
want to like you more than anything else
and that's a great deal man for sure
yeah no def I'm definitely very excited
for that that relationship building and
like you were saying and luckily in the
past we've had almost a little bit of
experience with the flip where when I
was I got better this year but in the
past when I was a little bit more
stressed out about entering a prep we
would communicate before getting into it
in the past past we didn't but we
started to communicate be like okay I'm
about to enter a really intense phase of
my prep right now so I just want you to
know preemptively I love you you were my
number one priority but right now I may
not be able to show you that as much as
possible but I promise afterwards we
will reconnect we will do everything we
can and also in the process I will do
the best I can so now that we've
practiced that you mentioned six months
it's going to be pulled away so we've
already been communicating and we will
more and especially you giving this tip
I'll go even talk to her again tonight
and be like I understand that you're
going to be stepped away for the six
months and give her permission to be
there for the baby and also understand
that afterwards we'll reconnect and come
back to each other but rather than
finding it out along the way
understanding it before it comes so that
we're able to prepare for it and not
build any resentment that that might
come so so the other thing that Tammy
and I figured out at that time was um
because your wife is going to be very
preoccupied with this new person and to
the degree that you want to be around
your wife that's going to leave you on
the outside like that's going to happen
and that's also a place where the kind
of resentments that tear families apart
can start to develop hey because you can
be resentful about your wife cuz she
isn't there and then you can be
resentful of your daughter because she's
taking you away from your wife and then
you'll deny all that because you'll
think well I'm not the sort of person
that could be jealous of a baby it's
like oh yes you are you definitely are
and so is everyone else so these things
have to be managed and so one of the
things we discovered this was actually
my wife's suggestion that once say after
that six-month period where your wife
has the wherewithal potentially to
attend to you to some degree let's say
and to want to do that um we start
that's when we started our practice of
regular
dates you know and we have done that for
I don't know how long 35 years now you
know like we make dates two to three
times a week and we've done that for
that long and that's a really smart idea
because one of the things you'll find is
that you're you're going to be way
busier than you can possibly imagine
once you have this baby and even more so
if you have more kids like it's a
real threshold
transformation right because now you
have someone really vulnerable and you
are responsible for them like it's
unlike anything you'll have ever done
now you're a disciplined guy so you know
you have taste of that sort of thing but
it's still it's it's a watershed moment
and uh because you're so busy now it's
easy for your relationship with your
wife to become secondary or even number
11 on a list of 10 priorities you know
and that's not good and so my sense is
that couples who are embarking on the
process of having kids have to make a
conscious commitment to placing each
other
first at for some amount of time during
the during the months the weeks and
months ahead it can't you can't just
wait around for it to happen cuz you
don't have the bandwidth and so and this
has been this is something we've got
better and better at too and I would say
cumulatively you know over all the
decades is that the dates we have just
get better and better just like because
of practice but nego so if you know you
know you're you're going to have to
leave your wife to the baby for six
months and then maybe she'll be able to
come back to you and then but having a
plan for that you know like to begin
with she's still going to be pretty
tired it might be that you
know you have someone take care of the
baby while you're at home and you guys
have dinner together something that
simpler you watch a movie together you
know it's got to kind of start out slow
but having a conscious plan for how
you're going to prioritize your
relationship given that you now have a
baby to take care of that's going to
save you a lot of misery and grief as
well absolutely yeah that preemptive
planning is something I've been
processing a lot especially recently cuz
she's also
in pregnancy of course they create
connection and they're they're building
their home and almost nesting I guess
you could say and I've been going
through a large very large growth phase
of uh my business that I own here in
Florida and we've been traveling a lot
for that so I've been out of town a lot
and you were talking about part of your
worries when you were having a child
where you got to get your PhD which is
also good for your family longterm so
that you're able to provide for them and
that's partly what I'm processing and
going through right now is it's taking
me away a little bit right now but I
understand long term it's it's going to
provide for for my family it's what's
going to be best for them but then let's
say over the last over the next 3 months
in the first 3 months of the year I'm
home for about 8 Days 10 days and
Courtney's home all the time so I need
to be a lot more conscientious when I
come home of being planner like okay I'm
only back for 3 days we need to plan
ahead that we're going to do date nights
every time I'm back because we need that
time to connect and that's even that's
also great practice like you said where
I I I might feel busy now but when
there're the child in the mix of all
that it's it's going to be tenfold so
being able to pre ly plan ahead and
actually build structure and routine
where you're planning those moments of
connection rather than just waiting for
them to naturally happen which maybe
when you're young and you just it's
Friday night let's go out we're not
tired let's have fun it used to happen
naturally but as life get picks up you
need to be a lot more attentive to
actually planning ahead and making sure
it happens well and you also got to
learn with each other you know because
there's going to
be imagine there's an optimal balance
between look if you're going to have
Thanksgiving dinner m want to eat a
pizza like at 4 in the afternoon right
you want to be optimally
hungry and it's a state of optimal
deprivation and so you also want to
negotiate with that with your wife you
know as as you progress through your
marriage it's like how much time do you
have to spend with each other but how
much time do you have to spend apart or
in a state of desire right to make all
of that optimal you know and that's
that's a very subtle thing to get right
you know like my wife needs to be alone
more than me and she is a lot more fun
to be around and a lot more interested
in me if I leave her the hell alone
more and because I would likely
choose what would you say I'm more
cuddly God what a horrible thing to say
and admit than she is you know and it's
easy to be put off by
her somewhat prickly exterior she's very
playful but kind of rough you know and
so she she's kind of a prickly person
and it's actually something I like about
her but you know we've had
to be very attentive to find exactly
that balance you know so that I'm not
around her too much so that she can come
to miss me so that when we are together
that we're both extremely happy about it
you know and that's something that this
regular practice of
planned togetherness that can also
Foster that because you can learn that
it's like well cuz you can watch
yourself so like you'll find out well
when am I H when am I truly happiest to
see her like under what conditions and
she has to figure that out with you too
you know and that's a good thing to
discover
and and you can Discover it if you if
you make that effort so well you have a
big year coming up e with a new baby and
and where when is your next major
competition it's in October this year
end of year and so you start really ramp
ing up for that
when depends on how everything goes in
the year but maybe around
July right okay okay and you're going to
figure out how to do that with this new
child in your life too that's that's the
challenge that we're going to be working
on this year yeah right right right well
you got a lot of good things sitting
there in front of you lot of new
mountains by the sounds of things MH for
sure and so I've been lucky that last I
was talking about bodybuilding forever
for me so as I'm approaching what I feel
like at the end of my career these new
mountains are forming in front of me so
I it feels like everything's kind of
coming as it's meant to be and a
hopefully beautiful culmination of the
journey with the beginning of a new one
that is will be discovering my new
mountains and new forms of growth and
new ways to find fulfillment so I'm very
excited right right well it's very wise
to be looking ahead to that already and
not to be it's a really good thing to
know this is something you can learn as
you get older and hypothetically are
like it's not such a bad thing to to
leave the party when it's going strong
especially if you got something else
exciting you know beckoning to you
around the next corner you know and you
can imagine athletes in particular you
know they have their Glory Days for sure
and it's very much dependent on Youth
and and The Cutting Edge that that youth
gives you and you have to know when
you're at the peak of your game and when
the time to move on arrives that is
earlier in athletes lives generally than
in other people's lives and having the
wisdom to see that and to not only
accept but welcome it know that that's
one thing you can do to make that
transition I wouldn't even say easier
but to allow yourself to transition to
something that could even be better I
mean you've already had spectacular
success but that doesn't necessarily
mean that you've reached your Peak and
that's a good thing to know too for sure
sure yeah I'm I'm glad you pulled back
that word easier because as I'm coming
more face to face with the the
transition and as you said leaving the
party while the part's still fun it's
feeling more challenging than I thought
it would be and it as it should be it
shouldn't it shouldn't feel easy
especially because I'm not leaving
something that has turned into something
I resent I'm leaving something I learn
to actually enjoy more but everything
comes to an end and like you said
sometimes that leaving something great
behind will lead to something even
greater and I'm glad that I have the my
family in front of me to be that
something much much greater yeah that's
a good deal that's a good deal all right
so everybody watching and listening I'm
going to continue to talk to Chris on
the dailywire plus side of the platform
I think we're going to talk to begin
with about his father because he's made
some comments in this YouTube uh com uh
discussion about his admiration for his
father and also his
Discovery or adoption even of the role
of dad in the in the Enterprise that
he's pursuing and so we're going to
delve into that a little bit further as
well as some other autobiographical
details and anything that happens to
come up that's interesting as a
consequence so if you'd like to join us
there please do you can consider
throwing some support the daily wire
plus way which I think isn't such a bad
idea given that they're staunch
advocates for the kind of free speech
and free inquiry that we all desperately
need especially now and so Chris thank
you very much for agreeing to talked to
me today that was that was very engaging
and and and a lot of fun and I
appreciate that and also for your
willingness to discuss so
forthrightly the obstacles that you know
you still see in front of you and that
have caused you a certain amount of
distress that you're busily working to
master and overcome it's very useful for
people to hear about that sort of thing
so you know I think you do people a real
service when you are willing to
talk so straightly about such things as
you've seen you know we've seen the
impact that that's had on people and to
the dailywire plus people thank you and
for the film crew here in Toronto for
facilitating This Much appreciated and
to everyone watching and listening your
time and attention is always appreciated
and not taken for granted CH Chris good
to get to know you man yeah likewise I
appreciate the conversation it's been an
honor and you've helped me as well just
talking through things that helps me
process and learn so thank you for
this conversation and the previous
one-sided conversations we've had
listening to over the years it's an
honor to be on this podcast with you
thank you very much
[Music]
sir